---
layout: ../../../layouts/PostLayout.astro
title: "Why Nations Fail"
date: 2024-10-10T12:00:00Z
---

# Preface

I started reading this book due to an interest in Javier Milei's policies in
Argentina. That and some interesting discussions about austerity on Reddit.
Perhaps because Reddit is predominantly left-leaning, the general sentiment
there surrounding Milei is largely negative, which further arouses within me an
interest in determining the effectiveness of his policies.

_Why Nations Fail_ seems to go into the idea of institutions, which is something
I am also interested in. On one side you have the US, where political power is
distributed across institutions and where administrative inefficiency is a
feature, not a bug. On the other you have a polar opposite in China where
centralized political power is wielded pragmatically yielding huge economic
growth.

Perhaps because I live in a country considered a flawed democracy, somewhere in 
the middle, the questions of institutions and their longevity is of particular
interest to me.

## What I hope to takeaway from this book

- The effectiveness of austerity policies
- Is economic growth under non-pluralistic systems sustainable?

## 1. So Close and Yet So Different

How historical events shape regional economics. The Spanish modus operandi in
South America for milking locals dry. England's colonial leftovers in Jamestown.
Colonist options besides working like slaves (joining the frontier or Indians)
which in turn led to a change in strategy by top brass to give each colonist man
their own land.

US versus Mexican economic climate in the 1910s. The US with over 27,000 banks
and Mexico with 40. Monopolies in US versus Mexico (Bill Gates versus Carlos
Slim). Mexico with its repeated regime changes.

Why is it that the US and Mexico are so different?

## 2. Theories That Don't Work

Geographical, Cultural, Ignorance.

Prothestants versus Catholics in Europe.

The example of the Ghanian President who pursued unsustainable economic policies
who eventually had to strike a deal with the IMF to devalue the currency. Riots
in the capital and ousted by military coup.

## 3. The Making of Prosperity and Poverty

What makes inclusive versus extractive institutions (political and economic).

The part I don't know if I agree with is whether or not extractive political
institutions cannot lead to sustainable inclusive economic institutions.

I guess the question is more of whether the definition of an extractive
political institution (a absolutist state) is accurate.

The traits of extractive political institutions are noted as absolutist
(concentration of political power) and existence of a state (monopoly of
legitimate violence). 

Case in point Singapore and China. But I guess the book does get to China that
in a later chapter. And I don't have a good enough understanding of Singapore's
political institutions and how truly pluralist or absolutist they are.

## 4. Small Differences and Critical Junctures

How seemingly small institutional differences result in very different
trajectories during critical junctures.

Example: England, France and Spain all had centralized political power in their
monarchies, but differed in how much powers their opposing forces had, e.g.
Parliament in England, Cortes in Spain. Parliament controlled taxation whereas
Cortes did not.

The critical juncture of expansion into the Americas by these countries had
resultingly very different outcomes. Independent English traders obtained more
power whereas the Spanish Crown gained a monopoly over all trade.

Other examples:

1. Absolutist differences between China and Japan before colonizers
came knocking (England and the US respectively).
2. The Black Plague and resulting differing divergences in Western versus
Eastern Europe (due to presence of serfdoms).

## 14. Breaking the Mold

## 15. Understanding Prosperity and Poverty: The Irresistible Charm of Authoritarian Growth



# Random Thoughts/Ideas

_Inclusive political institutions: Pluralistic (broad distribution of political
power) and existence of a centralized state (legitimate monopoly on violence)_ 

_Inclusive economic institutions: Secure private property rights and the equal
enforcement of rule of law_ 

Do inclusive economic institutions always lead to economic growth for all?

Are institutions a satisfactory explanation of economic prosperity?

Why does China succeed while other "extractive political institutions" fail?
e.g. Latin America, Africa

The authors make the claim that growth we are witnessing under China is similar
to growth previously seen under the Soviet Union, and that this growth is
unsustainable unless China undergoes political transformation toward inclusive
political institutions.

China is still very much an authoritarian state. Entrepreneurs who challenge
state owned companies can be aribtrarily locked up at the whims of the state.
Even one of the most powerful businessmen in China, Jack Ma, is not immune to
such treatment.

In the authors' view, sustainable growth is only achievable through innovation
and creative destruction. Things which are not possible without inclusive
economic conditions. Which is evident given the absence of a impartial rule of
law in China.

Why is creative destruction not possible under autocratic governments? There are
examples in the book, such as African kings not being incentivised to implement
efficient technologies in farming when they can pursue more profitable slave
trade.

It's not obvious to me that extractive economic institutions don't allow for
creative destruction, as long as the state/CCP is incentivised.

What is the explanation for lagging economic development in India despite it
having by definition inclusive political institutions?

The mechanism by which pluralism creates a fair enforcement of law is not
obvious. Perhaps a consequence of pluralism, checks and balances, can prevent
any single entity from becoming too powerful/above the law.

But I would argue that corruption is an even more significant factor in
determining an equal enforcement of the rule of law. It is possible for
corruption to infect even pluralist institutions to favour certain parts of
society over others (e.g. The United States).

But absolutist institutions are definitely more susceptible to corruption
compared to pluralist institutions.

What are other factors that make institutions more susceptible to corruption?

How does this relate to modern critiques of late stage capitalism?

What sectors should and should not be privatised?
